What is Data Bus in Computer System?

In a computer system, The data bus is a set of paralled electrical conductors
that are used to transmit data between different components of the system.
It is a communication pathway that allows data to be transferred between the central processing unit(CPU)
, memory and other devices such as input, output, I/O ports and peripheral devices
The data bus is typically made up of multiple wire. Each of which can carry one bit of information at a time.
The width of the data bus measured in bit determines the amount of data that can be transferred at once.
A wider data bus can transfer more data at once than a narrower one.
For example a 64-bit data bus can transfer 64 bits of data at a time while a 32-bit
data bus can only transfer 32 bits at a time. This means that a system with a 64-bit data bus can transfer more data
and process it faster than a system with a 32-bit data bus.
Additionally the data bus is typically unidirectional which means data can travel in Only One Direction along the bus.
This is to ensure that data is only read or written by the appropriate component and not accidentally overwritten by another
component.
However, some systems use a bi-directional data bus which allows data to be transmitted in both directions.
The data bus is also divided into two parts. One for read operations and the other for write operations.
This is to keep read and write operations separate and prevent conflicts between them.
The read bus is used to transmit data from memory or an I/O device to the CPU while the write bus is used to transmit
data from the CPU to memory I/O device.
The data bus is one of the most important components of a computer system as it enables the different
components of the system to communicate and exchange information.
it is a vital part of the system's architecture and its performance has a direct impact on the system's overall performance.
That's why the size and speed of the data bus are critical factors in determining the performance of a computer system.